feat: new high availability doc for Dqlite (#17979)
juju/juju: doc/high_availability.md

High Availability (HA)

> ======================

Reviewer: Based on the content that follows, the topic here is just _controller_ high availability, so I'd update the title to that.

Juju can be run in high availability (HA) mode. In HA mode Juju runs on 
multiple controller instances making it resilient to outages.

HA mode is invoked via the `enable-ha` command. By default, this will ensure 
three controllers, but using the `-n` flag will allow running with five or 
seven controllers.

> The number of controllers can be reduced by invoking `remove-machine` with a 

Author: Regarding the first 3 points, your understanding is correct.

Regarding the latter 3:
- Juju will run with whatever number of controllers, you will just have degraded resilience.
- `enable-ha` does validate that you have an odd number of controllers >1 && <=7. This document is for the current behaviour, not ideal behaviour.

> controller machine ID, and increased by re-running the `enable-ha` command.

Reviewer 2: I certainly think that long term this will be nice to become `juju add-unit -m controller juju-controller` and/or `juju remove-unit`.
Someday :)

Reviewer 3: For 4.0, I really was hoping we'd do this TBH, especially now the controller charm does what it's supposed to do wrt configuring dqlite etc. Is there a concrete reason why we can't now drop enable-ha in favour of add/remove unit?

Author: Other than hoping to get it done one day, no.

### Dqlite

Each controller is a Dqlite node. The `dbaccessor` worker on each controller is 
responsible for maintaining the Dqlite cluster. When entering HA mode, the 
`dbaccessor` worker will configure the local Dqlite node as a member of the 
cluster.

> 

Author: I think I've addressed this sufficiently in the latest iteration.

When starting Dqlite, the worker must bind it to an IP address on the local
machine. It is a requirement that there is a unique local-cloud-scoped address
for Dqlite to use. If there is no unique address, new nodes will not be joined 
to the cluster until one can be determined. See _Controller Charm_ below.

Beyond joining nodes to the cluster, Juju does not manage Dqlite node roles.
This is handled within Dqlite itself. A cluster will have one leader, voters
which are eligible to participate in leader elections, stand-bys and spares.

> Juju does not predicate any logic on node roles.

Reviewer 2: It does do logic based on who the leader is, but I don't think we do any other logic.
I'm not sure if that subtlety is worthwhile.

Author: Dropped it.

If the number of controller instances is reduced to one, the `dbaccessor` 

> worker will recognise this scenario and proactively reconfigure the cluster to

Reviewer 4: **suggestion:** I think `recognise` should be in the present tense.
```suggestion
worker recognises this scenario and proactively reconfigure the cluster to
```

References: https://www.enago.com/academy/ifthen-using-conditional-sentences-in-academic-writing/
(we are in a case where the **Zero conditional sentences** case => there is no assumption on the behavior of `dbaccessor` in the case of the number of controller instances drop to one. It is a known, sure consequences (at least if we have no bug :) )

**suggestion:** maybe search `will` usages and assess it regarding above rules ;)

> be constituted by the local node only.

Reviewer 2: How do we handle HA=2? Do we keep the second one as a hot spare that can't vote itself to primary, or do we drop it lower than that?
My original Mongo logic made it so that you would have Availability over Correctness (as long as the secondary went down, you would still have availability, but I realize it actually means you lose redundancy, and it *might* be better to lose availability so that nothing can be done that won't at least be replicated somewhere.)

Author: Today, if 1 machine of 3 goes away, it is still recorded in _cluster.yaml_ as a voter, so you rely on both the 2 remaining for quorum.

If you go to 1, we invoke backstop and reconfigure. If you go back to HA-3, the removed node is still in _cluster.yaml_, but becomes a _spare_.

### Controller Charm

The controller charm propagates binding information to the `dbaccessor` worker.
It coordinates with other controller units via the `db-cluster` peer relation.
If there are multiple potential bind addresses for a Dqlite node, the user must
supply an endpoint binding for the relation using a space that ensures a unique
IP address.

### API Addresses for Agents

When machines in the control plane change, agent configuration files are 
re-written with usable API addresses from all controllers. Agents will try
these addresses in random order when connecting, so that an inaccessible 
controller just results in connection to another.

The list of addresses supplied to agent configuration can be influenced by the
`juju-ctrl-space` controller configuration article. This is supplied with a
space name in order that agent-controller communication can be isolated to 

> specific networks.

Reviewer 2: I'm pretty sure this is still spelled `juju-mgmt-space` in 4.0. Ideally it would also become a binding rather than a controller configuration. But since we don't model the relations of each agent to the controller, it doesn't really have a place to live. It *is* what `extra-bindings` was designed for, but I know we don't like the nomenclature. With the caveat that all progress on *improving* the network model has stalled, which means we at least have *something* that can be used, even if it isn't perfect yet.

https://github.com/juju/juju/blob/d0d39e6e8ee41039b1befa728c03db19b6cbd4ab/controller/config.go#L240

### API Addresses for Clients

Each time the Juju client establishes a connection to the Juju controller, it
is sent the current list of API addresses and updates these in the local store. 
The client's first connection attempt is always to the last address that it 
used successfully. Others are tried subsequently if required.

> Addresses used by clients are not influenced by the `juju-ctrl-space` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Addresses used by clients are not influenced by the `juju-mgmt-space` 
```

configuration.

### Singular Workers

Many workers, such as the `dbaccessor` worker above, run on all controller 
nodes, but there are some workers that must have exactly one instance running. 
An obvious example of this is a model's compute provisioner - we don't want 
multiple actors attempting to start a cloud instance for a new machine.

> The controller that such singular workers run on is determined by the lease

Reviewer 4: **suggestion:**  If this documentation exists, we should have a link to it. If not, we should add a comment

```md
<!-- TODO: add a link to lease subsystem documentation whenever it lands -->
```

Reviewer: Some notes and a possible solution:

(1) such as the `dbaccessor` worker above

This sort of reference usually signals an information architecture problem. 

(2) "run on all controller nodes"

Below we also speak of "instance". And I'm guessing we really mean "unit". Whichever we pick, I'd be consistent and maybe go for "unit" -- in Juju, horizontal scaling and, piggybacking on that, HA, is a matter of units. (Even if all labels apply, the inconsistency is causing me to have to think harder than strictly necessary.)

(3) "singular workers" 

Seems like unnecessary jargon.

(4) "must have exactly one instance running" 

Confusing -- what could it even mean in the context of HA? I'd rephrase as "run on exactly one controller unit, where the unit is determined by the lease sub-system."

Overall suggestion:
Have a section "Workers involved in controller HA" or something like that, then mention both the `dbaccessor` worker and others, then comment (this can even be a subsection -- even if the content is just one line, it's logically a subtopic) on how they differ with respect to whether they run on all controller units or on exactly one controller unit, as determined by the lease sub-system.

networks.

## API addresses for clients

Each time the Juju client establishes a connection to the Juju controller, the
controller sends the current list of API addresses and the client updates these 
in the local store. The client's first connection attempt is always to the last 
address that it used successfully. Others are tried subsequently if required.

Addresses used by clients are not influenced by the `juju-mgmt-space` 
configuration.

## Single instance workers

Many workers, such as the `dbaccessor` worker, run on all controller instances,
but there are some workers that must run on exactly one controller instance. 
An obvious example of this is a model's compute provisioner - we would never 
want more than one actor attempting to start a cloud instance for a new 
machine.

Single instance workers are those declared in the model manifolds configuration
that use the `isResponsible` decorator. This in turn is based on a flag set by the
`singular` worker.

The `singular` worker only sets the flag if it is the current lease holder for 
the `singular-controller` namespace. See the appropriate documentation for more 
information on leases.

> 

Author: The lease _manager_ has some nominal documentation, but there is no documentation dedicated to the lease system as a concept. This is a gap.
